README.md, before:

# substrait-go

Experimental Go bindings for [substrait](https://substrait.io)

## Note:

This is work in progress still, things still to do:

- [ ] Expression parsing
- [x] Reading in extension yamls
- [x] CI building and testing the implementation
- [ ] Serialization/Deserialization of some expression types:
  - [x] IfThen
  - [x] SwitchExpression
  - [x] SingularOrList
  - [x] MultiOrList
  - [x] Cast
  - [x] Nested
  - [ ] Subquery
- [ ] Plan Building helpers

As this is built out, you can expect refactors and other changes to the
structure of the package for the time being. **The API should not yet be
considered stable.**

## Generate from proto files

### Install buf

First ensure you have `buf` installed by following https://docs.buf.build/installation.

### Install go plugin

Run the following to install the Go plugin for protobuf:

```bash
$ go install google.golang.org/protobuf/cmd/protoc-gen-go@latest
```

Ensure that your GOPATH is on your path:

```bash
$ export PATH="$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin"
```

### Run go generate

As long as buf and the Go protobuf plugin are installed, you can 
simply run `go generate` to generate the updated `.pb.go` files. It
will generate them by referencing the primary substrait-io repository.

You can then commit the updated files.

Commit message:

doc: document submodule and update_substrait

README.md, after:

# substrait-go

Experimental Go bindings for [substrait](https://substrait.io)

## Note:

This is work in progress still, things still to do:

- [ ] Expression parsing
- [x] Reading in extension yamls
- [x] CI building and testing the implementation
- [ ] Serialization/Deserialization of some expression types:
  - [x] IfThen
  - [x] SwitchExpression
  - [x] SingularOrList
  - [x] MultiOrList
  - [x] Cast
  - [x] Nested
  - [ ] Subquery
- [ ] Plan Building helpers

As this is built out, you can expect refactors and other changes to the
structure of the package for the time being. **The API should not yet be
considered stable.**

## Substrait Submodule
The [substrait](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait) repo is included in substrait-go
to allow downstream consumers to use the proto messages in their own proto definitions.

The `update_substrait` script can be used to update the submodule depdency and regenerate the protos. 

## Generate from proto files

### Install buf

First ensure you have `buf` installed by following https://docs.buf.build/installation.

### Install go plugin

Run the following to install the Go plugin for protobuf:

```bash
$ go install google.golang.org/protobuf/cmd/protoc-gen-go@latest
```

Ensure that your GOPATH is on your path:

```bash
$ export PATH="$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin"
```

### Run go generate

As long as buf and the Go protobuf plugin are installed, you can 
simply run `go generate` to generate the updated `.pb.go` files. It
will generate them by referencing the primary substrait-io repository.

You can then commit the updated files.
